# Pixi3D
Pixi3D is a JavaScript library which makes it possible to render 3D graphics 
using PixiJS. Because Pixi3D is built on top of PixiJS, it plays very nice with 
the already established and easy to use PixiJS API. Pixi3D includes several 
components which makes it easy to create nice looking 3D scenes out-of-the-box.

* Built on top of the already familiar PixiJS API
* Load models from file or create procedural generated meshes
* Supports physically-based rendering (PBR) and image-based lighting (IBL)
* Morphing and rotation/translation/scale animations
* Customizable materials and shaders

# Getting started
Let's create a simple program which renders a rotating cube. Start by [getting the latest version](https://github.com/jnsmalm/pixi3d/releases) of Pixi3D. Pixi3D has a dependency to [PixiJS](https://github.com/pixijs/pixi.js/releases) (v5.2+), so that is needed as well.

Create a file *app.js* with the following contents.

*app.js*
```javascript
let app = new PIXI.Application({
  backgroundColor: 0xdddddd, resizeTo: window, antialias: true
})
let box = app.stage.addChild(PIXI3D.Mesh3D.createCube())

let rotation = 0
app.ticker.add(() => {
  box.rotationQuaternion.setEulerAngles(0, rotation++, 0)
})
document.body.appendChild(app.view)
```

Also create *index.html* and include the required scripts.

*index.html*
```html
<!doctype html>
<html lang="en">
<body>
  <script type="text/javascript" src="pixi.js"></script>
  <script type="text/javascript" src="pixi3d.js"></script>
  <script type="text/javascript" src="app.js"></script>
</body>
</html>
```

### Examples

Included with the source code is a set of examples on how to use the different 
features of Pixi3D. The examples can be found in the *examples/src* folder and 
can be run by using the *serve* script.

For example, to run the *getting started* application:
```
npm install
npm run serve -- --env.example=<example>
```

The *serve* script can also be used for trying out Pixi3D without having to do 
any additional setup. Just create a new file i.e. *app.js* in examples folder and run it with the *serve* script:

`npm run serve -- --env.example=app`

# Documentation
Pixi3D is built on top of PixiJS (v5.2+) and therefore any program that wants 
to use Pixi3D, also needs to include PixiJS. The PixiJS library focuses on 2D 
graphics, put since version 5 the library exposes a set of lower level API:s 
which is what Pixi3D takes advantage of. PixiJS is a established library and 
contains a lot of functionality for making a coders life easier. Such features 
could be loading assets, having a hierarchy of objects or handling user 
interaction. PixiJS works on both desktop and mobile and Pixi3D should work on 
all platforms supported by PixiJS (v5.2+).

## Container and transform

A container is what the name suggests - a container for other objects. A 
container can be used for creating an object hierarchy with parent-child 
relations. Container objects has a transform property which is used to be able 
to set the position, rotation and scale of that object. When creating a 
hierarchy of objects, the transform of a child object is always relative to 
it's parent transform. For example, when moving the parent all of it's children 
will move as well (same also for rotation and scaling). 

API: Container3D, Transform3D.

Note about Pixi3D and PixiJS transform, 3D/2D.

## Mesh and model

A mesh contains the geometry of an object and has a material which is used to 
render the mesh geometry. A model is a container for mesh objects and can also 
include animations for those meshes. A mesh can be created with geometry which 
has been generated by code, or it can be loaded from a glTF file as a model.

> glTF™ (GL Transmission Format) is a royalty-free specification for the 
> efficient transmission and loading of 3D scenes and models by applications. 
> glTF minimizes both the size of 3D assets, and the runtime processing needed 
> to unpack and use those assets. glTF defines an extensible, common publishing 
> format for 3D content tools and services that streamlines authoring workflows 
> and enables interoperable use of content across the industry.

Read more about glTF at https://www.khronos.org/gltf/

API: Mesh3D, Model3D.

## Material and shader

A material is what defines and renders the geometry of a mesh. Which material 
to use depends on the requirements of how the object should be displayed. By 
using customized materials, it is possible to create any desired graphical 
effect. A material uses a shader to describe the displayed output.

Shader programs are written using OpenGL Shading Language (GLSL) which runs on 
the GPU. The shader interprets the data of the mesh geometry and describes how 
that data should be rendered on screen. There are two types of shaders in 
Pixi3D, vertex shaders and fragment shaders. Vertex shaders are used to control 
where vertices end up on the screen and pixel shaders are used to set the color 
of a pixel.

API: Material, PhysicallyBasedMaterial.

## Custom material

*color-shader.vert*
```glsl
attribute vec3 position;

uniform mat4 world;
uniform mat4 viewProjection;

void main() {
  gl_Position = viewProjection * world * vec4(position, 1.0);
}
```

*color-shader.frag*
```glsl
uniform vec3 color;

void main() {
  gl_FragColor = vec4(color, 1.0);
}
```

*app.js*
```javascript
const { Camera3D, Model3D, Material } = PIXI3D

class ColorMaterial extends Material {
  constructor() {
    super(["position"])
  }

  updateUniforms(shader) {
    shader.uniforms.world = this.mesh.transform.worldTransform.array
    shader.uniforms.viewProjection = Camera3D.main.viewProjection
    shader.uniforms.color = [0.8, 0.2, 0.7]
  }

  createShader() {
    return new PIXI.Shader(PIXI.Program.from(
      app.loader.resources["color-shader.vert"].source,
      app.loader.resources["color-shader.frag"].source
    ))
  }

  static create() {
    return new ColorMaterial()
  }
}

let app = new PIXI.Application({ width: 800, height: 600, antialias: true })

Camera3D.main.aspectRatio = 800 / 600

app.loader.add("cube.gltf")
app.loader.add("color-shader.vert")
app.loader.add("color-shader.frag")

app.loader.load(() => {
  let model = app.stage.addChild(
    Model3D.from("cube.gltf", { materialFactory: ColorMaterial })
  )
})

document.body.appendChild(app.view)
```

## Cubemaps

PIXI3D supports loading cubemaps from file. It expects 6 images which all share the same filename format (example below). `{{face}}` will be replaced with the following strings: "posx", "negx", "posy", "negy", "posz" and "negz". It can also contain optional mipmaps.

*environment.cubemap*
```json
{
  "source": "folder/environment_{{face}}_128x128.jpg",
  "mipmap": [
    "folder/environment_{{face}}_64x64.jpg",
    "folder/environment_{{face}}_32x32.jpg",
    "folder/environment_{{face}}_16x16.jpg"
  ]
}
```

*app.js*
```javascript
app.loader.add("environment.cubemap")
app.loader.load(() => {
  let texture = app.loader.resources["environment.cubemap"].texture
})
```

## Image based lighting

Cmft (https://github.com/dariomanesku/cmft) is a tool which can generate radiance and irradiance cubemaps to be used as diffuse and specular image based lighting.

*Diffuse (irradiance)*
```
% cmft --input environment.hdr --filter irradiance --inputGammaDenominator 2.2  --outputNum 1 --output0 diffuse --output0params tga,bgra8,facelist

% mogrify -format jpg *.tga
```

*Specular (radiance)*
```
% cmft --input environment.hdr --filter radiance --srcFaceSize 256 --dstFaceSize 256 --excludeBase true --glossScale 10 --glossBias 1 --lightingModel phongbrdf --useOpenCL true --inputGammaDenominator 2.2 --outputNum 1 --output0 specular --output0params tga,bgra8,facelist

% mogrify -format jpg *.tga
```

*environment.ibl*
```json
{
  "diffuse": {
    "source": "diffuse_{{face}}.jpg"
  },
  "specular": {
    "source": "specular_{{face}}_0_256x256.jpg",
    "mipmap": [
      "specular_{{face}}_1_128x128.jpg",
      "specular_{{face}}_2_64x64.jpg",
      "specular_{{face}}_3_32x32.jpg",
      "specular_{{face}}_4_16x16.jpg",
      "specular_{{face}}_5_8x8.jpg",
      "specular_{{face}}_6_4x4.jpg",
      "specular_{{face}}_7_2x2.jpg",
      "specular_{{face}}_8_1x1.jpg",
    ]
  }
}
```

*app.js*
```javascript
app.loader.add("environment.ibl")
app.loader.load(() => {
  LightingEnvironment.main.ibl = app.loader.resources["environment.ibl"].ibl
})
```

## Development

The following command will start a local webserver in "dist" folder and watch all files for changes.
```
> npm install
> npm start
```

## Building

The following command will build *pixi3d.js* in "dist" folder with production settings.
```
> npm install
> npm run build
```